async post (#6)
conradludgate/blog-next: src/pages/posts/async/index.mdx

A famous example of an async programming language is JS, which can only execute code using 1 thread, but still needs
to support allowing multiple streams of work to happen at the same time.

For instance, say you want to make a network request, but while you're communicating with the external service, you want
to update the web page with a live updating progress bar.

<ProgressBar />

One way we can accomplish this in a single threaded setup is by allowing multiplexing.
That is, allowing one task to temporarily pause to allow another task to resume. Eventually, both tasks will be run to completion,
but neither blocks the other.

### I thought this blog post was about Rust...?

I've already hinted at another mechanism to allow concurrency, threads! Rust allows multithreading, so why do we need async code?
Well, there's many reasons. Maybe you're writing code on an embedded device that only supports a single threaded operations.
Maybe you're working in the Linux kernel itself and don't have access to just create threads as you please.
Maybe you just want more control about what tasks can run and in which order, and to not be at the mercy of your OS schedular.

> Whatever your reasoning, async rust is general enough to support your needs

Reviewer: Is there meant to be more here?

## Back to the Future

> Before we dive to deep into async runtimes and how the OS handles IO etc, we need to talk about the future (trait).

Reviewer: I think it would be good to explain the link between async and futures first, just a clause like "at the core of Rust async lies the `Future` trait", otherwise it feels a bit random why you suddenly start talking about a trait that doesn’t apparently have any connection to async.

> Futures represent a contract that a value might not be ready immediately, but at a later point in time. Let's take a look at the definition

Reviewer: Maybe add a colon or full stop at the end of this line? You might also want to mention that it comes from `core::future::Future` (or `std::future::Future`).

```rust
pub trait Future {
    type Output;
    fn poll(self: Pin<&mut Self>, cx: &mut Context<'_>) -> Poll<Self::Output>;
}
```

There's a lot going on here... I don't want to talk about some of this yet, so for now, let's give it a bit of a hair cut...

```rust
pub trait Future2 /* eletric boogaloo */ {
    type Output;
    fn poll(&mut self) -> Poll<Self::Output>;
}
```

> Ok, that looks a bit better, but what's this `Poll` thingy?

Reviewer: Might be better to go more step-by-step here, first of all explaining `Output`, then moving on to `poll`, then posing the question of "what's `Poll`?" — it would make it flow better.

## What the Async?

Async code exists to allow a programming language to offer more control in the way that code can run concurrently.
A famous example of an async programming language is JS, which can only execute code using 1 thread, but still needs
to support allowing multiple streams of work to happen at the same time.

For instance, say you want to make a network request, but while you're communicating with the external service, you want
to update the web page with a live updating progress bar.

<ProgressBar />

One way we can accomplish this in a single threaded setup is by allowing multiplexing.
That is, allowing one task to temporarily pause to allow another task to resume. Eventually, both tasks will be run to completion,
but neither blocks the other.

### I thought this blog post was about Rust...?

I've already hinted at another mechanism to allow concurrency, threads! Rust allows multithreading, so why do we need async code?
Well, there's many reasons. Maybe you're writing code on an embedded device that only supports a single threaded operations.
Maybe you're working in the Linux kernel itself and don't have access to just create threads as you please.

> Maybe you just want more control about what tasks can run and in which order, and to not be at the mercy of your OS schedular.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Maybe you just want more control about what tasks can run and in which order, and to not be at the mercy of your OS scheduler.
```

Whatever your reasoning, async rust is general enough to support your needs

## Back to the Future

Before we dive to deep into async runtimes and how the OS handles IO etc, we need to talk about the future (trait).

Futures represent a contract that a value might not be ready immediately, but at a later point in time. Let's take a look at the definition

```rust
pub trait Future {
    type Output;
    fn poll(self: Pin<&mut Self>, cx: &mut Context<'_>) -> Poll<Self::Output>;
}
```

There's a lot going on here... I don't want to talk about some of this yet, so for now, let's give it a bit of a hair cut...

```rust
pub trait Future2 /* eletric boogaloo */ {
    type Output;

>     fn poll(&mut self) -> Poll<Self::Output>;

Reviewer: More time definitely needs to be spent explaining the polling model — for example if someone's familiar with Javascript they'll have no idea what `poll` means. So say something like “to multitask on one thread, instead of having the work take over the thread we can have small lightweight functions that start the real work in the background, allowing the user to request it to finish later”.

It’s also probably a good idea to explain why we have to poll _multiple_ times instead of just once. That's better tackled later when you start writing chained futures ­— you can initially start with a `trait Future` that looks like this:

```rs
trait Future {
    type Output;
    fn start(&mut self);
    fn finish(&mut self) -> Self::Output;
}
```

Then once you try to write a chained future (multiple `.await`s) you’ll “realize” the problems with this and organically switch to a `poll`-based design.

}
```

Ok, that looks a bit better, but what's this `Poll` thingy?

Well, it's ~~an Option~~ a representation that a future value is either ready, or not ready:

```rust
pub enum Poll<T> {
    Ready(T),
    Pending,
}
```

This is how our contract is upheld. If the future is ready to compute the value,
calling `poll` will return `Ready`, otherwise it won't, and instead returns `Pending`.

> You'll also notice the poll function takes in a mut reference to itself, this means it can make progress on every individual poll function.

Reviewer: I don't think a comma is correct here grammatically. Also it sounds a bit vague ­— maybe say something more specific like “it allows it to update its own state so it can make progress”?

            Poll::Ready(n) => break n,
            // if pending, continue the loop
            Poll::Pending => println!("value was not ready - {fut:?}"),
        }
    };
    // Done!
    println!("value is ready - {n:?}");
}
```

```
   Compiling playground v0.0.1 (/playground)
    Finished dev [unoptimized + debuginfo] target(s) in 1.28s
     Running `target/debug/playground`

polling             - Init
value was not ready - Step1(6)
polling             - Step1(6)
value is ready - 42
```

Woo! We successfully made a future and polled it to completion

## Where's the async?

So, 2 problems. This doesn't do what we wanted.

First, where's the async stuff?! I thought this article was about async!

The second problem is that we've only got 1 future being polled.
The original point was to allow multiple tasks to be run concurrently.

I promise that we'll get back to the async later, but let's solve this second problem.
Scheduling multiple tasks together was the original point, so it'll be good if we can reason about that.

Solving this scheduling problem is easy actually, we just need more tasks.
Then, instead of calling `poll` on the same task over and over, we alternate.

> The problem then becomes now how you interweve those tasks, but how you know

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The problem then becomes how you interweave those tasks, and how you know
```

when best to poll a task.

For instance, let's say our future makes a HTTP request but the data is not ready yet.

> There's no point constantly polling our future asking if it's ready, preferably it would tell us

Reviewer: Seems unfinished?

### Time to add some more Context

> Let's update our future trait again with one of the parts we removed

Reviewer: I think it looks a bit weird without a full stop at the end of the line

```rust
pub trait Future3 /* revenge of the context */ {
    type Output;
    fn poll(&mut self, cx: &mut Context<'_>) -> Poll<Self::Output>;
    //                 ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^  New!
}
```

This context is uhh, what is this? ~~Is this Go?~~

> Ok, looking at the docs we see

Reviewer: Maybe link the docs? Just to make it clear what you're talking about

```rust
/// The Context of an asynchronous task.
pub struct Context<'a> { /* private fields */ }

impl<'a> Context<'a> {
    /// Create a new Context from a &Waker.
    pub fn from_waker(waker: &'a Waker) -> Context<'a>;

    /// Returns a reference to the Waker for the current task.
    pub fn waker(&self) -> &'a Waker;
}
```

> Ok, so `Context` clearly refers to our task, but it seems this `Waker` thing is more important.

Reviewer: Not sure about "`Context` clearly refers to our task", there's nothing actually shown that indicates that `Context` is _specific to_ an async task. It might just be better to note that "`Context` seems to be a simple wrapper around a `&'a Waker`" and then explore from there. You could even look at the source to confirm that, and then explain the reasoning (future compat).

```rust
/// A Waker is a handle for waking up a task by notifying its executor that it is ready to be run.
pub struct Waker { /* private fields */ }

impl Waker {
    /// Wake up the task associated with this Waker.
    pub fn wake(self);
}
```

Aha! So this seems to represent a task in an 'executor' (don't know what that is, whatever).
And it allows us to tell that task to wake up! This is what we want for our network interface.

We can create a future that talks to the OS for network access, and then we can get the OS to
call this `wake()` method when data is available to tell the task that it's ready to continue processing.

### Finally, some async

> Ok ok, as promised, here is async code in it's full glory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ok ok, as promised, here is async code in its full glory.
```

```rust
async fn my_async() -> usize {
    let n = step1().await;
    7 * n
}

async fn step1() -> usize {
    6
}
```

This is the same as our `MyFuture` type from earlier,

> but since it's written in a normal looking rust function, it can be easier to reason about.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
but since it's written in a normal looking Rust function, it can be easier to reason about.
```

We can see here that we await for the value of `step1`, and then we multiply it by 7 and return it.

Everywhere you see this `.await`, you can think of as a place our future state machine could return `Pending`.

Let's desugar a bit (you're already sweet enough)

> Our async function is really a regular function that returns a future

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our async function is really a regular function that returns a future:
```

```rust
fn my_async() -> impl Future<Output = usize> {
    async {
        let n = step1().await;
        7 * n
    }
}
```

And our async block will build the initial state of our future.

### Stick a Pin in it

Ok great! Our async/await can represent out Future types nicely. Maybe they can do more?

```rust
let x = "foo";
async {
    println!("{x}");
};
```

Ok awesome! Just like closures, async blocks can capture outside scope.

> We should expect that this `Future` is bound by the lifetime of `x`.

Reviewer: This is a bit of a jump — it’d be clearer to explain “because it's `async`, that means it borrows all the variables it captures. Therefore ...”.

> This would be similar to the state machine

Reviewer: Bringing in “the state machine” out of nowhere is a bit confusing. I think it would read clearer as “We can also implement this future by hand” or “Now, we can also implement this future manually”

```rust
struct CaptureFuture<'x> {
    Init {
        x: &'x str
    }, // (init -> done) will print
    Done,

> }

Reviewer: I get that this `impl` technically isn't necessary for the next section's point but I find it surprising to not have it.

```suggestion
}

impl Future for CaptureFuture<'_> {
    type Output = ();
    
    fn poll(&mut self, cx: &mut Context<'_>) -> Poll<Self::Output> {
        match self {
            Self::Init { x } => {
                println!("{x}");
                *self = Self::Done;
                Poll::Ready(())
            }
            Self::Done => panic!("Polled after completion"),
        }
    }
}
```

```

Ok, let's try something else. This time, maybe even a bit more realistic!
Let's say we have a `Vec<u8>` and we use an `AsyncRead` (works the same as `Read`, but async!).

```rust
async {
    let mut buf = Vec::new();

    let mut reader = TcpStream::new().await; // use your imagination

    let n = reader.read(&mut buf).await.unwrap();
    //             ^^^^           ^^^^^
    //               like read      but async :)

    println!("Read {:?}", buf[..n]);
}
```

This seems simple enough. Let's apply our magic and try and build this in our
state machine form.

> First, let's disect this `.read()` future. It borrows our buffer mutably,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, let's dissect this `.read()` future. It borrows our buffer mutably,
```

> as well as the reader, so it must look something like

Reviewer: This reads awkwardly, I think using “both” would be better.

Reviewer: as in: “it borrows both our buffer and the reader mutably”

> as well as the reader, so it must look something like

Reviewer: ```suggestion
as well as the reader, so its declaration must look something like:
```

```rust
struct Read<'buf, 'read, R> {
    reader: &'read mut R
    buf: &'buf mut [u8]
    // more stuff here...
}
```

Ok, now for our actual future

```rust
enum TcpRead {
    // first, we create our buffer
    Init {
        buf: Vec<u8>
    },
    // then we create our reader to go along with it
    Reader {
        buf: Vec<u8>,
        reader: TcpStream,
    },
    // then we borrow buf and reader while we read...
    Reading {
        buf: Vec<u8>,
        reader: TcpStream,
        reading: Read<'buf, 'read, TcpStream>,
    },
    // then we print and finish
    Done,
}
```

> Seems simple enough - wait a minute, what are the `'buf` and `'read` lifetimes here?!

Reviewer: I think this kind of point is made even better by actually trying to build it, and looking at the compilation error. Then the reader feels more like they're following along and figuring it out themselves.

> This is a self referential enum! I'm sure this is a criminal offence in Rust, so what do we do here?

Reviewer: Should probably explain how we go to here more? So you’d write out the entire thought process of “what should these lifetimes be?” → “where do they borrow from?” → “they borrrow from a field” → “what’s the lifetime of a field?” → “oops, self-referential structs aren’t possible” or something similar to that.

Maybe our async code is the problem? But we _really_ want this to work.

Ok, if we're commiting crimes, why don't we go all in?

> So, self-referential data types are "fine" as long as you don't move them. The references will still point

Reviewer: I think it’s better to introduce this concept later on: first of all fully implement a non-`Pin`ned version and _then_ explain why `Pin` is a good idea (e.g. “But there's a problem. Because all types in values can be moved whenever the caller wants, there’s nothing stopping them moving this future and invalidating our reference” or something like that). That way it ends up following the locked door → key structure.

to the same place in memory, which is still the data you expect.
However, if it moves, that's a problem since the pointers will be pointing at garbage data.

Right, okay. So we can use unsafe to break our references a bit, make them static or something.

```rust
// Safety:
// Our caller should not move our future (and therefore our buf)
let buf = unsafe {
    core::mem::transmute::<&mut [u8], &'static mut [u8]>(&mut buf);
};
```

That's great, but how do we tell our callers about these safety guarantees?
I guess we could make the `poll` method unsafe, but that kinda sucks since this
makes every single future unsafe to call, and removes any flexibility on what
these safety guarantees are.

Well, maybe there is another way?

> What if we could make it unsafe to move the value _at all_ after we call `poll`?

Reviewer: I wouldn't describe _this_ as being the main benefit of `Pin`, since it could already be satisfied fine with an `unsafe fn poll`. I'd phrase it more as `Pin` being useful because it is an encapsulation of the `unsafe`.

That's what `Pin` is! `Pin` is a type that's unsafe to construct,

> unless our type implements `Unpin` (an trait that guarantees it's not self-referential),

Reviewer: I think you're going way too fast here. You can start by explaining `Pin`'s basic guarantee (“the data won't be moved”), and if you want to explain `Unpin` you don't actually have to introduce it until later (since `Pin` without `Unpin` is actually a perfectly fine system, the only problem is that it's needlessly `unsafe` in many circumstances).

or unless you use the `Box::pin` method to pin it in a boxed allocation (since boxed data is guaranteed to not move).

This gives us our final `Future` trait:

```rust
pub trait Future {
    type Output;
    fn poll(self: Pin<&mut Self>, cx: &mut Context<'_>) -> Poll<Self::Output>;
    //            ^^^ pinned! our callers have promised not to move us
}
```

### Executor Order 66

Ok, now that we have futures out of the way (sorry, that took a while) we can get to executors.

> I showed off a simple executor earlier, let's update it to work with our new updated future trait:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I showed off a simple executor earlier, now let's update it to work with our new future trait:
```

It phrases better without repeating the word “update”

        match fut.as_mut().poll(&mut cx) {
            Poll::Ready(n) => break n,
            Poll::Pending => println!("value was not ready"),
        }
    };
    // Done!
    println!("value is ready -> {n:?}");
}
```

Ok, so what about spawning more tasks to run along side this one?

Well, I gave a solution earlier! We just keep a list of tasks and loop through them!

```rust
fn main() {
    /// snip: let cx = ...;

    // a ring buffer with efficient FIFO operations
    let mut tasks = VecDeque::new();

    // Pin the future (using box now because our tasks will be moving around :flushed:)
    let fut = Box::pin(/* fut */);

    // insert our task!
    tasks.push_back(fut);

    loop {
        let mut fut = tasks.pop_front().unwrap(); // take the first task
        match fut.as_mut().poll(&mut cx) {
            Poll::Ready(_) => break,
            Poll::Pending => {
                tasks.push_back(fut); // we need to re-queue our task now!
            },
        }
    };
}
```

Now, our `TcpRead` future just needs access to some `spawn()` function that pushes a second
task into our tasks queue.

> Ok, let's extract it into a struct and make it a thread local instead,

Reviewer: I don't think that comma at the end of the line is grammatically correct. I think you'd either need an em dash or full stop, or you could rephrase the next clause as “so that we can ...”

that way we can easily call `spawn()` anywhere in our code stack!

```rust
// Task alias
type Task = Pin<Box<dyn Future<Output = ()>>>;

// our executor struct owns our task queue
#[derive(Default)]
pub struct Executor {
    // Using a RefCell because we'll need interior mutability :O
    queue: RefCell<VecDeque<Task>>
}

thread_local! {
    // Our thread local executor. Will be initialised later.
    // Uses an Rc because it will need multiple owners

>     static EXECUTOR: OnceCell<Rc<Executor>> = OnceCell::new();

Reviewer: You don't need `OnceCell` for `thread_local!`s, they're lazily initialized anyway

pub fn spawn(&self, fut: impl Future<Output = ()>) {
    EXECUTOR.with(|e| e.get().unwrap().spawn(fut));
}

impl Executor {
    /// registers this executor onto the current thread
    fn register(self: &Rc<Self>) {
        EXECUTOR.with(|e| e.set(self.clone));
    }

    pub fn spawn(&self, fut: impl Future<Output = ()>) {
        self.tasks.borrow_mut().push_back(Box::pin(fut));
    }

    /// Waits for the future to complete
    pub fn block_on<F: Future>(&self, fut: F) -> F::Output {
        self.register(); // we're now in executor land

        // a way to store the output of the future, which will also signal
        // that we are done
        let output: Rc<RefCell<Option<F::Output>>> = Rc::new(RefCell::new(None));

        let output2 = Rc::clone(output);
        self.spawn(async move {
            let output = fut.await;
            *output2.borrow_mut() = Some(output); // set out output value
        });

        loop {
            let mut fut = self.tasks.borrow_mut().pop_front().unwrap(); // take the first task

            // I swear, I'll explain this junk in a little bit!
            let wake = MyExecutorWake::default();

>             let waker = Waker::from(Arc::new(wake));

Reviewer: The fasterthanlime thing to do would be to write out the `unsafe` version first, but I suppose jumping a few steps isn't too bad :P

Author: I'm refactoring this part anyway, putting context with the other part later on

            let mut cx = Context::from_waker(&waker);

            if fut.as_mut().poll(&mut cx).is_pending() {
                self.tasks.borrow_mut().push_back(fut); // we need to re-queue our task now!
            }

            // exit our loop if we have our final value :)
            if let Some(output) = output.borrow_mut().take() {
                break output
            }
        }
    }
}
```

> This is it! This is a functioning single threaded async executor. Let's run it

Reviewer: “This is it” sounds a bit weird, probably better phrased as “And that's it!” or something. And “Let’s run it" I think would work better as “Let's try it out!” (and it needs the punctuation at the end)

```rust
fn main() {
    let executor = Executor::default();
    executor.block_on(start());
}

async fn start() {
    // our magic business logic goes here
    for i in 0..10 {
        spawn(async move {
            println!("hello from task {i}");
        });
    }
}

> ```

Reviewer: Show the program’s output! You can’t come all this way for no reward at the end :P

    until: Instant,
}

impl Future for Sleep {
    type Output = ();
    fn poll(self: Pin<&mut Self>, cx: &mut Context<'_>) -> Poll<()> {
        if self.until > Instant::now() {
            Poll::Pending
        } else {
            Poll::Ready(())
        }
    }
}

pub fn sleep(dur: Duration) -> Sleep {
    sleep_until(Instant::now() + dur)
}
pub fn sleep_until(until: Instant) -> Sleep {
    Sleep { until }
}
```

Cool, this works. It will allow other tasks to work while it's sleeping,
but if you're paying attention,
you'll notice that we've turned our efficient `thread::sleep(dur)` into

```rust
let until = Instant::now() + dur
while self.until < Instant::now() { }
```

Busy loops like this are usually not a good idea...

So, we need a way to tell our executor that this sleep is unlikely to make progress.
Ideally, all tasks would tell the executor that they are ready for more work. This is where
our Waker comes in.

Currently in our executor `block_on` function, we have

```rust
if fut.as_mut().poll(&mut cx).is_pending() {
    self.tasks.borrow_mut().push_back(fut);
}
```

Which enqueues the task just as soon as it returns pending. What if we instead got the task

> itself to do this for us.

Reviewer: I think this section is explained a bit in the wrong order. Because the thing that busy-loops right now isn't actually the `Sleep` future, it's the executor. So maybe you could explain it like this:
1) A busy-looping executor (locked door)
1) Using wakers in the executor (key)
1) A deadlocking `Sleep` future — even better if you actually run the program and witness the deadlock so you can “investigate” it (locked door)
1) A busy-looping `Sleep` future (using `cx.waker().wake_by_ref()`) (partial key)
1) A proper `Sleep` future (key)

Also, you don’t actually have to introduce the `cx` parameter until now — it would be easier to understand if you only add it when it's actually needed. So up until now your `Future` trait will look like:

```rs
trait Future {
    type Output;
    fn poll(self: Pin<&mut Self>) -> Poll<Self::Output>;
}
```

And then afterward it will look like:

```rs
trait Future {
    type Output;
    fn poll(self: Pin<&mut Self>, waker: &task::Waker) -> Poll<Self::Output>;
}
```

And then only after that can you point out the backward compatibility concern and switch to the real `Context`.

                e.tasks.borrow_mut().push_back(fut)
            });
        }
    }
}
```

Now, we will construct our task context

```diff
- let wake = MyExecutorWake::default();
- let waker = Waker::from(Arc::new(wake));
+ let wake = Arc::new(TaskWaker { task: RefCell::new(None) });
+ let waker = Waker::from(Arc::clone(wake));
let mut cx = Context::from_waker(&waker);
```

Finally, we update the task polling to push the task here instead of the main queue

```diff
if fut.as_mut().poll(&mut cx).is_pending() {
-   self.tasks.borrow_mut().push_back(fut);
+   // our task is now in charge of scheduling itself!
+   wake.task.borrow_mut().push_back(fut);
}
```

Yay! So now we're not wasting cycles polling tasks that aren't ready,
we should probably add a check in our main loop to not panic if the tasks
list is empty now

```diff
- let mut fut = self.tasks.borrow_mut().pop_front().unwrap(); // take the first task
+ let mut fut = match self.tasks.borrow_mut().pop_front() {
+     Some(fut) => fut,
+     None => continue,
+ }
```

### Iron Man wants his `Arc<Reactor>` back

Currently, there's nothing for our sleep future to register to in order to wake up.
Let's fix that.

> Let's give our executor a 'reactor', which will be reacting to side-effects.

Reviewer: I think this is a bit of a jump just introducing a concept like this. It would be better to fully organically design a reactor from the ground up, in several stages:

1) `thread::spawn` on every `Sleep` future
1) Point out that this is inefficient
1) Use a shared background thread between all `Sleep` futures (or thread pool or something)
1) Merge that background thread with the main thread (final reactor design)

Then you can point out that this concept has a name: a “reactor” (although Tokio calls it a driver but it’s the same thing)

Author: Yeah I considered that, but then I need to make all my code thread safe 😢

Reviewer: Not the entire thing, right? Just the sleep future needs to be thread safe. It just has to be a single `Arc<Mutex<Waker>>` which I don't think is too difficult.

Author: But the Waker would be called on a different thread to the Executor, so it would need the executor to be sync too

Reviewer: Ah, true. But that does mean your current executor is incorrect...
